# GraphEditor Frontend

This is the GUI for the GraphEditor project. It supports users to work with different databases.

## Table of contents

-   [Overview](#overview)
    -   [The challenge](#the-challenge)
    -   [Network graph](#network-graph)
      -   [Event manager](#event-manager)
-   [Our process](#our-process)
    -   [Built with](#built-with)
    -   [Requirements](#requirements)
    -   [Development](#development)
      -   [Global State Management](#global-state-management)
      -   [Theming](#theming)
      -   [Icon Fonts](#icon-fonts)
      -   [Applications' focus and blur management](#applications-focus-and-blur-management)
	  -   [React Compiler](#react-compiler)
      -   [Error Handling](#error-handling)
      -   [SBOM and Licenses](#sbom-and-licenses)
    -   [Testing](#testing)
-   [Authors](#authors)
-   [TODOs](#todos)

## Overview

### The challenge
Build out the project to the designs provided.

### Network graph
Our (WebGL) graph provides multiple GUI functionalities such as dragging a node, selecting multiple nodes, etc..., which are all
described below. Please note, currently most of the graph GUI functionalities are not optimized for touch devices.

#### Select node(s)
To select nodes, please hold down the Shift key on your keyboard, click on the graph, and start moving your mouse to select multiple
nodes.

#### Move node(s)
If you already selected nodes, simply click and drag one of the selected nodes. If there are no previously selected nodes, simply
click and drag a node you want to move.

#### Auto-connect node
By holding down Ctrl (Strg) + left-click on a node and moving your mouse, you can quickly create a node, which will be connected
to the node you clicked on. On the left side of your screen you can choose which labels to assign to new nodes (default: none).

You can also connect two existing nodes by doing Ctrl (Strg) + left-click on a node and dragging your cursor to an existing node.
On the left side of your screen you can choose which relation type to assign to new relations. If not chosen, we will assign one
for you (default: auto-generated by our backend).

In this mode, on mouse-up we will try and store data on server and sync the data with the graph. You might see a semi-transparent
overlay, this indicates the data between server and frontend are being synced.

NOTE: If you create a new node this way, you'll notice your mouse click/hover events are not working on it unless you move your mouse. This is due to the fact we programmatically remove the temporary node (the "moving" node) and create a new
node based on the server data. Since this is done programmatically (without any user interaction), Sigma isn't registering
that your mouse is hovering the newly created node. There are some technical solutions to resolve this, but none of them
are safe enough to be implemented, and moving your mouse isn't that troublesome.

#### Quick-node
In order to quickly create a non-connected empty node using our GUI, please hold down Ctrl (Strg) and do left-click on canvas
(not node or relation). On the left side of your screen you can choose which labels to assign to new nodes (default: none).

#### Move camera
To move camera around, simply do a left-click on graph (not nodes or relations) and move your mouse.

#### Node and label scaling
Both node and relation labels are auto-scaling with the graph, meaning, when you zoom in or zoom out, those labels will auto-scale with
the graph. This enables more fluid user experience, rather than rendering labels with a constant size, regardless of your current
zoom level.

You can still manually adjust the (linear) label scaling factor by holding down Shift and scrolling up or down ( depending on if you
want to scale the factor up or down) while over canvas (not node or relation).

If you would like to scale up or down your nodes, you can do that by holding down Alt and scrolling up or down ( depending on if you
want to scale the factor up or down) while over canvas (not node or relation).

#### Zoom factor

Graph zoom factor can be easily adjusted to your needs. We offer two ways to change the zoom factor.
The first way is via your keyboard by holding down the Ctrl (Strg) key and scrolling up or down (depending on if you want to
increase od decrease the zoom factor).
The second way is via GUI elements on the left side of the graph. There you'll see a slider which you can use to set your desired
zoom factor value. Close to the slider you will also see a reset button which will reset the zoom factor to its default (hardcoded)
value.

### Event manager
In order to simplify and enable single-flow of events executed, an event state manager based on the FSM (Finite State Machine) pattern
is implemented.

For more technical information, please check the StateManager class.

For an event-flow diagram, please execute next block into http://www.webgraphviz.com/:

```
digraph G {
	"IDLE" -> "NODE_ENTER"
	"IDLE" -> "NODE_DOWN"
	"IDLE" -> "RELATION_ENTER"
	"IDLE" -> "STAGE_DOWN"
	"IDLE" -> "SCALE"

	"STAGE_DOWN" -> "NODE_SELECTION"
	"STAGE_DOWN" -> "NODE_QUICK"

	"NODE_DOWN" -> "NODE_DRAG"
	"NODE_DOWN" -> "NODE_AUTO_CONNECT"
	"NODE_DOWN" -> "NODE_CLICK"

	"NODE_ENTER" -> "NODE_DOWN"
	"NODE_ENTER" -> "NODE_LEAVE"

	"NODE_LEAVE" -> "IDLE"
	"NODE_LEAVE" -> "NODE_ENTER"
	"NODE_LEAVE" -> "RELATION_ENTER"

	"RELATION_ENTER" -> "RELATION_LEAVE"
	"RELATION_ENTER" -> "RELATION_CLICK"

	"RELATION_LEAVE" -> "IDLE"
	"RELATION_LEAVE" -> "NODE_ENTER"
	"RELATION_LEAVE" -> "NODE_DOWN"
	"RELATION_LEAVE" -> "RELATION_ENTER"

	"SCALE" -> "IDLE"
}
```

## Our process

### Built with

-   HTML5
-   SCSS
-   Typescript
-   Internationalization Library [react-i18next](https://react.i18next.com/)
-   [React](https://reactjs.org/)
-   [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/)
-   [Vitest](https://vitest.dev/)
-   UX/UI library [DB UI MONO Library](https://db-ui.github.io/mono/version/v0.0.59/)
-   Form validation [React Hook Form](https://react-hook-form.com/)

### Requirements

-   Node must be installed (version: >=20.18.0)
-   Docker must be installed (recommended version: >= 24.0.0)

## Development

In order to start local frontend development, we need to do a couple of things.

1. **create frontend/.env file**
    - Copy `frontend/.env.dist` to `frontend/.env`

2. **run `npm i`**

3. **run Docker (local backend server)**:
    - Go to the root directory and run `docker-compose up backend neo4j-enterprise` to start local backend server. It is possible you are not
      required to pass username and password in Neo4J browser GUI in order to connect to the neo4j database, but if you are, please
      check the backend documentation and/or its environment files

4.**run frontend**:
    - `npm run dev` in this directory to start the project locally. For other commands please refer to the _package.json_ file.

5.**mock data**:
    - If you need mock data to explore the project, please visit http://localhost:4999/swagger. Under the headline "Dev tools" you can
      find `/dev/reset` and `/dev/osm_data` endpoints. For a simple set of data, you can use the `/dev/reset` endpoint, for a more
      complex set of data please use the `/dev/osm_data` endpoint.

If you successfully followed this short tutorial, you should see our homepage in your browser.

### Global State Management

For managing global state withing the application, we use [Zustand](https://github.com/pmndrs/zustand).

We tried keeping API layer out of it, but because sometimes it would fit really well into it, and to reduce code complexity, you <br>
might find API calls inside Zustand states.

When working with global state, please don't mix one state properties or methods with another another state.

### Theming

`@db-ux/react-core-components` come with a whitelabel theme. If you want to use another theme, you can generate one via <br>
https://design-system.deutschebahn.com/theme-builder/main/customization or you can manually create one by simply overwriting existing <br>
CSS variables. The newly generated theme files should be added to the `src/assets/themes` directory and included into the main SCSS <br>
file (`src/assets/scss/main.scss`).

### Icon Fonts

In the project, we use SVG icons to generate a woff2 font which is then used for icons. The font is generated via the `generate-icon-font` <br>
NPM script. SVG icons stored in the `src/assets/source-icons` directory are used as source of icons. The generated @font-face CSS <br>
file from the `generate-icon-font` NPM script is forwarded in the `src/assets/scss/main.scss` file. If you change the generated font <br>
name, please update the `--db-icon-font-family` variable as well. For more technical information how all of this works, please check <br>
the `generate-icon-font` NPM script.

Please make sure to name icons as they are named in the `@db-ux/react-core-components` package. Because of the `--db-icon-font-family` <br>
CSS variable, our own icons will be automatically picked by the package. If you use SVG icons from other sources, please make sure <br>
to leave the source and the icon name as a class inside the SVG icon. This way we will know the source and original name of the icon.

At the moment, most of our icons come from https://lucide.dev/icons/.

### Application's focus and blur management

When developing our application, particularly when implementing features with time delays or those that monitor user interactions <br>
like keyboard inputs, it's crucial to consider the possibility of our application loosing its focus. This can occur when a user navigates <br>
away from our application, such as by switching tabs or clicking outside the window. If we don't manage such focus change events effectively, <br>
our application functionalities could remain in an in-between state, potentially preventing users from using our application smoothly <br>
or even accessing it altogether.

It is advisable to attach event listeners to the window's "blur" event rather than relying on the document's Visibility Change API. <br>
The reason for this is the broader scope of application tracking needed, encompassing window-level blur events such as switching tabs <br>
within the same browser window, minimizing the browser, and similar scenarios—rather than just document visibility transitions.

### React Compiler

https://react.dev/learn/react-compiler

10.03.2025
Not working as intended, try another time.
Tested with the MainVisual.tsx component and a simple component which would do console.log('test') and return <div>1</div>.
Although the new child component had no props, it was re-rendered each time the MainVisual component was re-rendered.
The cause for this was located in the MainVisual's "executeSearch" function, specifically the "postCypherQuerySearch" function call.

### Error Handling

In order to unify error handling and prepare it for a logging service such as Sentry.js, we are observing errors at one place only.<br>
You can find relevant code inside the `src/main.tsx` file. At the moment, we are observing 2 groups of errors:<br>
- React errors:
  - errors during render, gives as a possibility to reload affected blocks/components
- JS errors:
  - observe non-React related errors (thrown Errors, failed Promises and similar)
  <br>

For more information about observing React errors, please visit https://react.dev/reference/react-dom/client/createRoot#parameters.

Please be careful to trigger proper error when catching errors in the code manually.
Promise-based errors should be thrown via `Promise.reject` or, if you are manually doing a promise, then link this <br>
`new Promise((resolve, reject) => { ...reject(...) })`.

- Promise.reject - try and throw new error via the `reject` method
  ```js
    Promise.reject(new Error('My error message'))

    OR

    new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
      ...
      reject(new Error('My error message'));
    })
  ```
- Try/catch - try and throw new error via the catch block
  ```js
    try {
      ...
    } catch (error) => {
      ...
      throw new Error(parseError(error));
    }
  ```

The Error object expects a string, so if you are working with caught errors, you can use our `parseError` function to process the <br>
caught error and return a string from it. Please always create an Error object instance when manually dealing with errors. This will <br>
add an error stack to the caught/rejected (Promise.reject) errors.

### SBOM and Licenses

Generating SBOM and dependency license check happens during the production build. For more information, please check the `vite.plugins.ts` file.

## Testing

Currently, we provide basic test setup and a couple initial unit tests in terms of testing.

We use [Vitest](https://vitest.dev/) in combination with [headless Playwright](https://vitest.dev/guide/browser/#headless) as our testing setup.
Ideally, we would run unit tests in a browser-emulated environment but working with WebGL2 (Sigma.js) forced us
to switch to real browser environment since we were not able to mock WebGL2.
If, at some point, the WebGL2 mocking issue is resolved, we could switch back to a browser-emulated environment.

When testing keyboard events, please see [Testing library keyboard documentation](https://testing-library.com/docs/user-event/keyboard/).

To run unit tests, please run `npm run test`. If you want to check unit test coverage, please run `npm run test:coverage`.

## Notes

### CSS files order

At the moment, it is not completely clear in which order does Vite inject CSS files.
If you look at the `frontend/src/App.tsx` file and compare CSS files injected in the browser (use development mode for easier
file injection sort tracking), you'll see the order of injected CSS files doesn't match neither the import order nor the render
order of components in the `frontend/src/App.tsx` file.
If we come to a point where we explicitly want to control the order of CSS files, we could import all our SCSS files in the
`frontend/src/assets/scss/main.scss` file and sort them as we want.
If we do that, don't forget to remove component's SCSS file from the component definition file, otherwise we will have duplicate CSS
definitions.


### WebGL

WebGL uses the GPU (graphics processing unit) to render 3D graphics and animations in web browsers. In order for some parts of
this application to work properly, your browser needs to support WebGL. Please enable the hardware acceleration option in your
browser if it is not already enabled.

## Authors

Team GraphEditor. Responsible frontend developers:

-   Mihajlo Lazar (mihajlo.lazar@deutschebahn.com)
-   Stefan Seliger (stefan.seliger@deutschebahn.com)

## TODOs

1. Revert `skipLibCheck` in `tsconfig.json` to `false` once Sigma.js reaches stable v3.
2. Consider utilizing useEffect's cleanup function to abort ongoing/duplicate API requests
3. Consider `subscribeWithSelector` for granular store changes subscription
4. Switch nodes and relations to classes
5. The `useTranslation` renders twice on first component re-render, investigate
6. Consider increasing Error.stackTraceLimit to infinity (default is 10).
